Integrate LRO Guidance to make Guidelines self-contained (#282)
Microsoft/api-guidelines: azure/Guidelines.md

GET    | Read the resource | `200-OK`
DELETE | Remove the resource | `204-No Content`\; avoid `404-Not Found`

> :white_check_mark: **DO** return status code `202-Accepted` and follow the guidance in [Long-Running Operations & Jobs](#long-running-operations--jobs) when a PUT, POST, or DELETE method completes asynchronously

Reviewer: PATCH too, right?

<!-- Open API Spec -->
[OpenAPI Specification]: https://github.com/OAI/OpenAPI-Specification/blob/main/versions/2.0.md

### Long-Running Operations & Jobs

When the processing for an operation may take a significant amount of time to complete, it should be
implemented as a _long-running operation (LRO)_. This allows clients to continue running while the

> operation is being processed. The client determines the outcome of the operation at some later time

Reviewer 2: @mikekistler -- I'm reacting to the word "determines" in this sentence. When I first read it, it sounded like the client can affect the outcome of the operation through an API call at a later time. What about something like...

```suggestion
operation is being processed. The client discovers the outcome of the operation at some later time
```

through another API call.

:white_check_mark: **DO** implement an operation as an LRO if the 99th percentile response time is greater than 1s.

There are two basic patterns that can be used for long-running operations:
1. Resource-based long-running operations (RELO)
2. Stepwise long-running operations

:white_check_mark: **DO** use the RELO pattern when the operation is on a resource that contains a "status" property that can be used to determine the outcome of the operation.

> 

Author: I think we need to add guidance on the name of the status field and terminal values for RELO too.

Reviewer: Also, how does this work if 2 LROs are issued to the same resource at the same time? I don't think this guideline is sufficient.

Reviewer 3: Generally, you only want to wait until the resource is in a stable state when you use RELO. You don't care which operation kicked it out of the stable state. So multiple LROs to the same resource tend to - in practice - work just fine. At least I have never gotten actual customer feedback on that pattern.

Author: I agree that this pattern is not appropriate if users need to know the completion status of _a specific operation_, as opposed to knowing if the desired effect of their operation has been achieved.  E.g. if a VM is "failed" and a user issues a "reboot" operation on that VM, what then want to know is when the machine is available -- not necessarily that it was _their particular operation_ that caused it to become available.

So I propose adding something like the following:
> The RELO pattern should not be used in cases where the completion status of individual operations may be important to users, as opposed to simply learning that _an_ operation of the type they requested (e.g. reboot of a VM) has successfully completed.

Reviewer: How should a service handle multiple concurrent long-running PATCH operations to a single resource? My guess is that the PATCH operations get queued, so they execute serially. This is good until you throw etags into the picture. If a client does a PATCH with an if-match etag the service should do what if another PATCH is already queued up? The queued PATCH may succeed and then the if-match will fail or the previous PATCH may fail and then the if-match is successful. But, the service returned a 202 accepting the PATCH before knowing the outcome. Or, if the client needs to know if a specific PATCH succeeded or failed, then they should not PATCH the actual resource itself and should issue the PATCH to an operations collection.

Maybe we say that this situation is so rare, we don't care but it makes me feel a bit uncomfortable. If we're ignoring dealing with this, then let's be sure we discussed and decided to ignore it.

> :ballot_box_with_check: **YOU SHOULD** use the stepwise LRO pattern only when the RELO pattern is not applicable.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
:ballot_box_with_check: **YOU SHOULD** only use the stepwise LRO pattern when the RELO pattern is not applicable.
```

#### Resource-based long-running operations

Some common situations where the RELO pattern should be used:
1. A "create" operation for a resource where the basic structure of the resource is created immediately and includes a status field that indicates when the create has completed, e.g. "provisioning" -> "active".
2. An action operation for a resource where both the initiation of the action and the completion of the action cause a change to the "status" property of the resource.

:white_check_mark: **DO** return a `200-OK` response, `201-Created` for create operations, from the request that initiates the operation.  The response body should contain a representation of the resource that clearly indicates that the operation has been accepted or started.

:white_check_mark: **DO** support a get method on the resource that returns a representation of the resource including the status field that indicates when the operation has completed.

> #### Stepwise long-running operations

Author: We should try to come up with a better name than "Stepwise" LRO.

Reviewer 2: I did a quick google search and didn't come up with anything better.

Reviewer: In my LRO slides (which I never published), I thought of LROs as these 2 catagories:
- 1:1 - Performing an action that mutates a resource in-place (but this has the 2 at once issue)
- 1:n - Performing an action that does not mutate a resource

Reviewer 4: Other options:
- "job-based" LRO
- "status-monitor" LRO
- "monitored LRO"

Reviewer 4: "status-monitor" LRO

:white_check_mark: **DO** support return of the operation-results for some documented period of time, a minimum of 24 hours, after the operation has completed.

:white_check_mark: **DO** include a `Retry-After` header in the response to the initiating request and requests to the operation-results endpoint. The value of this header should be an integer number of seconds to wait before making the next request to the operations-results URL.

:heavy_check_mark: **YOU MAY** support a `get` method on the operation-results collection endpoint that returns a list of all recently initiated operations.

:no_entry: **DO NOT** return any other `2xx` status code from the initial request of a stepwise LRO -- return `202-Accepted` and an operations-result URL even if processing was completed before the initiating request returns.

:no_entry: **DO NOT** return any data in the response body of a `202-Accepted` response.

Previous Azure guidelines specified "Azure-AsyncOperation" as the name of the response header containing the operation-results URL.

> :white_check_mark: **DO** return both `Azure-AsyncOperation` and `Operation-Location` headers if your service previously returned `Azure-AsyncOperation`, even though they are redundant, so that existing clients will continue to operate.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
:white_check_mark: **DO** return **both** `Azure-AsyncOperation` and `Operation-Location` headers if your service previously returned `Azure-AsyncOperation`, even though they are redundant, so that existing clients will continue to operate.
```

<!-- Open API Spec -->
[OpenAPI Specification]: https://github.com/OAI/OpenAPI-Specification/blob/main/versions/2.0.md

### Long-Running Operations & Jobs

When the processing for an operation may take a significant amount of time to complete, it should be
implemented as a _long-running operation (LRO)_. This allows clients to continue running while the
operation is being processed. The client obtains the outcome of the operation at some later time

> through another API call.

Reviewer: We should be clearer here with "significant amount of time to complete". I just worked with a team where the processing could take 2 weeks and we don't want to model this as an LRO.  I think the processing should be on the order of a few minutes at most; even 5 or 10 minutes seems too long to me to have an app poll.

Reviewer 3: Agreed, but we do need to give additional guidance on how to correctly model a process that takes 15+min to complete. 

In general, a long long running operation should be modeled as a discoverable (listable) resource in its own right - e.g. a "build" resource in a CI system can be "rediscovered" by listing pending builds rather than just being modeled as a generic operations resource.

Author: I'll take a stab at language to cover the "long-long-running operation" case.

> :white_check_mark: **DO** implement an operation as an LRO if the 99th percentile response time is greater than 1s.

Reviewer: This was from the old guidelines so I know where this came from. But, see my comment above.

There are two basic patterns that can be used for long-running operations:
1. Resource-based long-running operations (RELO)
2. Stepwise long-running operations

:white_check_mark: **DO** use the RELO pattern when the operation is on a resource that contains a "status" property that can be used to obtain the outcome of the operation.

> :ballot_box_with_check: **YOU SHOULD** only use the stepwise LRO pattern when the RELO pattern is not applicable.

Reviewer: I think it would be good to give an example of when it is not applicable.

#### Resource-based long-running operations

Some common situations where the RELO pattern should be used:

> 1. A "create" operation for a resource where the basic structure of the resource is created immediately and includes a status field that indicates when the create has completed, e.g. "provisioning" -> "active".

Reviewer: Create means POST, PUT or PATCH - I think these should be mentioned.
If PUT or PATCH (not POST), then how does this work for retries/idempotency?

Reviewer 3: If the requested target state of the created resource is the same (e.g. what will be the case for a retry), then the service can respond with a 200 and the current state of the resource. 

It would be up to the service to determine if it allows for partially created resources to be overwritten with conflicting settings or not. Is that the guidance you are looking for?

Reviewer: No, I misspoke in my comment. I meant we should give guidance for POST idempotency; not PUT/PATCH. We should also have guidance about resource visibility: should the resource be visible (but not in fully-constructed state) as soon as the operation is initiated, or should the resource not be visible until complete? I assume the former because this is the only way for a client to detect failure.

> 2. An action operation for a resource where both the initiation of the action and the completion of the action cause a change to the "status" property of the resource.

Reviewer: Again, what if multiple actions are applied to the resource at the same time?
How would etags fit into this story?

Author: If the multiple actions of the same type were requested -- e.g. reboot a VM -- then the service could simply "piggyback" duplicate actions on the first one.  Callers would see the first action complete and take that to mean that "their" action completed.

In other cases, either the service would have to reject actions that were inconsistent with the current outstanding action or the service should use the "stepwise" LRO pattern so that each user could see the outcome of their specific operation.

> :white_check_mark: **DO** return a `200-OK` response, `201-Created` for create operations, from the request that initiates the operation.  The response body should contain a representation of the resource that clearly indicates that the operation has been accepted or started.

Reviewer: I'm confused here. Does RELO mean the operation is acting on a "normal resource" or that the act of creating an operation is creating an "operation resource" which is being created purely to manage an ongoing operation?
Perhaps we need to break RELO into 2 different patterns: a pattern that performs an operation on a "normal resource" and a pattern for monitoring an operation using an operation-specific resrouce?

Author: I believe that RELO means there is no operation resource exposed to the user.  The status field of the "normal resource" is used to convey the completion status to the user.

I really do not want multiple RELO patterns if we can avoid it.  Thing are already complicated enough with RELO and stepwise LROs. Let's avoid adding a third type unless there is a real compelling need.

> :white_check_mark: **DO** support a get method on the resource that returns a representation of the resource including the status field that indicates when the operation has completed.

Reviewer: This feels like it's for the operation-specific resource.
It could be for the normal resource but then there is no way to execute multiple operations on the 1 resource at the same time.

Author: I think RELO has this restriction -- you can't execute multiple "incompatible" operations on the resource at the same time.

Reviewer: I agree that this is built into the RELO pattern but what if clients do this anyway as there is no way to prevent it?
An example is a long-running operation that subtracts money from a bank account resource and fails if the balance hits $0.00

:white_check_mark: **DO** define the "status" field of the resource as an enum with all the values it may contain including the "terminal" values "Succeeded", "Failed", and "Canceled".

:ballot_box_with_check: **YOU SHOULD** use the name `status` for the "status" field of the resource.

#### Stepwise long-running operations

> In a stepwise long-running operation, the client makes a request to initiate the operation processing and receives a URL in the response where it can obtain the operation results. The [HTTP specification](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc7231#section-6.3.3) calls the target of this URL a "status monitor" but we will refer to it as the operation-results.

Reviewer: We should say how this happens; for example, is this a POST? If so, how is idempotency achieved? If the client gets the URL in the response (and we should say which header this should be in) and the client crashes, how can a client instance catch of with this operation?

Author: I think stepwise LRO could be initiated by any of PUT, PATCH, POST, or DELETE.  The guidance below does say that the operation-results URL comes back in the `Operation-Location` header.

Reviewer 4: We should use "operation-status" rather than "operation-results".

:white_check_mark: **DO** return a `202-Accepted` status code from the request that initiates a stepwise LRO if the processing of the operation was successfully initiated.

> :white_check_mark: **DO** perform as much validation of the initial request as practical and return an error response when appropriate.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
:white_check_mark: **DO** perform as much validation of the initial request as practical and return an error response immediately when appropriate (without starting the operation).
```

> :white_check_mark: **DO** return the operation-results URL in the `Operation-Location` response header.

Reviewer: I'd merge this bullet with the above bullet

Author: I'm open to that if others think it is better.  I made it separate because it seems more consistent with the "checklist" style of guidelines we are using throughout.

> :white_check_mark: **DO** support the `get` method on the operation-results endpoint that returns a `200-OK` response with a response body that indicates whether the operation has completed and completion status (success, failed) with sufficient error information to diagnose failures.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
:white_check_mark: **DO** support the `get` method on the operation-results endpoint that returns a `200-OK` response with a response body that indicates whether the operation has completed and completion status (success, failed, canceled) with sufficient information to diagnose any potential failures.
```

> :white_check_mark: **DO** include a field in the operation-results named `status` to contain the operation status. This field should be a string with well defined values that must include "Succeeded", "Failed", and "Canceled".

Reviewer: ```suggestion
:white_check_mark: **DO** include a field in the operation-results resource named `status` indicating the operation's status. This field should be a string with well-defined values. Indicate the terminal state using "Succeeded", "Failed", or "Canceled".
```

:white_check_mark: **DO** include a field in the operation-results named `error` to contain error information -- minimally `code` and `message` fields -- when an operation fails.

> :white_check_mark: **DO** support return of the operation-results for some documented period of time, a minimum of 24 hours, after the operation has completed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
:white_check_mark: **DO** retain the operation-results resource for some documented period of time (at least 24 hours) after the operation completes. 
```

> :white_check_mark: **DO** include a `Retry-After` header in the response to the initiating request and requests to the operation-results endpoint. The value of this header should be an integer number of seconds to wait before making the next request to the operations-results URL.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
:white_check_mark: **DO** include a `Retry-After` header in the response to the initiating request and requests to the operation-location URL. The value of this header should be an integer number of seconds to wait before making the next request to the operation-location URL.
```

> :heavy_check_mark: **YOU MAY** support a `get` method on the operation-results collection endpoint that returns a list of all recently initiated operations.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
:heavy_check_mark: **YOU MAY** support a `get` method on the operation-results collection URL that returns a list of all recently initiated operations.
```

Reviewer: "Recently initiated" is ambiguous. Does them in-flight?
I think we want to say a GET on the collection by default returns in-flight operations (which is probably a small set so a good default). And then, maybe we have some query parameters to further include completed, error, canceled, and maybe a timestamp range?

Author: I agree we probably should be more specific.  But I would go the other way -- GET returns all operations by default -- in-flight, completed (success or error), and cancelled, and then we can offer query parameters to select specific types or timestamp ranges.

> :no_entry: **DO NOT** return any other `2xx` status code from the initial request of a stepwise LRO -- return `202-Accepted` and an operations-result URL even if processing was completed before the initiating request returns.

Reviewer: The terms operation-Location & operation-result are not used consistently. 
I think this whole thing is creaming for an example -- I do have some in my slide deck (even though I never recorded videos).

Author: I put examples in the separate document, and we can reference these once we decide where to put them.

:no_entry: **DO NOT** return any data in the response body of a `202-Accepted` response.

Previous Azure guidelines specified "Azure-AsyncOperation" as the name of the response header containing the operation-results URL.

:white_check_mark: **DO** return **both** `Azure-AsyncOperation` and `Operation-Location` headers if your service previously returned `Azure-AsyncOperation`, even though they are redundant, so that existing clients will continue to operate.

:white_check_mark: **DO** return the same value for **both** headers.

> :white_check_mark: **DO** look for **both** headers in client code, preferring the `Operation-Location` header.

Reviewer: This is client guideline; not a service guideline. If you want to say something about this, then I'd merge it with the previous bullet and I'd give better guidance. Specifically, clients should look for 'operation-location' first and if not present, then look for 'azure-asyncoperation'.

Reviewer 4: Remove "white_check_mark".

:white_check_mark: **DO** include a field in the operation-results resource named `status` indicating the operation's status. This field should be a string with well-defined values. Indicate the terminal state using "Succeeded", "Failed", or "Canceled".

:white_check_mark: **DO** include a field in the operation-results named `error` to contain error information -- minimally `code` and `message` fields -- when an operation fails.

:white_check_mark: **DO** retain the operation-results resource for some documented period of time (at least 24 hours) after the operation completes. 

:white_check_mark: **DO** include a `Retry-After` header in the response to the initiating request and requests to the operation-location URL. The value of this header should be an integer number of seconds to wait before making the next request to the operation-location URL.

:heavy_check_mark: **YOU MAY** support a `get` method on the operation-results collection URL that returns a list of all recently initiated operations.

> :no_entry: **DO NOT** return any other `2xx` status code from the initial request of a stepwise LRO -- return `202-Accepted` and an operations-result URL even if processing was completed before the initiating request returns.

Reviewer 4: We need to consider how "short LROs" should work here. Maybe just soften this one notch to discourage teams from doing this.

:ballot_box_with_check: **YOU SHOULD** only use the status monitor LRO pattern when the RELO pattern is not applicable.

#### Resource-based long-running operations

Some common situations where the RELO pattern should be used:
1. A "create" operation (PUT, PATCH, or POST) for a resource where the basic structure of the resource is created immediately and includes a status field that indicates when the create has completed, e.g. "provisioning" -> "active".
2. An action operation for a resource where both the initiation of the action and the completion of the action cause a change to the "status" property of the resource.

:white_check_mark: **DO** return a `200-OK` response, `201-Created` for create operations, from the request that initiates the operation.  The response body should contain a representation of the resource that clearly indicates that the operation has been accepted or started.

:white_check_mark: **DO** support a get method on the resource that returns a representation of the resource including the status field that indicates when the operation has completed.

> :white_check_mark: **DO** define the "status" field of the resource as an enum with all the values it may contain including the "terminal" values "Succeeded", "Failed", and "Canceled".

Reviewer 5: Should we suggest an extensible enum for this so it versions better?  The status monitor section below calls out a `string` in particular for this.
